[docs] New documentation page `State` (#3431)
mui-org/material-ui-x: docs/src/pages/components/data-grid/state/state.md

---
title: Data Grid - State
---

# Data Grid - State

<p class="description">Initialize and read the state of the data grid.</p>

## Initialize the state

Some state keys can be initialized with the `initialState` prop.

> ⚠️ The `initialState` can only be used to set the initial value of the state, the grid will not react if you change the `initialState` value later on.
>

> > If you need to fully control some models, use the control props instead (e.g. `prop.filterModel` or `prop.sortModel`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you need to fully control specific models, use the control props instead (e.g. `prop.filterModel` or `prop.sortModel`).
```

> > More information on each feature documentation page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can find more information on the corresponding feature documentation page.
```

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/InitialState.js", "bg": "inline", "hideToolbar": true}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/InitialState.js", "bg": "inline"}}
```
Otherwise, we cannot see how you initialise the state

## Access the state [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

The state is exposed on the `apiRef` object.

> It is strongly advised not to access the state values manually because the structure of the state can change if needs be.

Reviewer: Maybe that this sounds more descriptive?

```suggestion
It is strongly advised not to access the state values directly because the state itself is not considered a public API and its structure can change.
```

> The `x-data-grid-pro` package exposes a set of selectors, which are functions taking the whole state as an argument and returning some value.
> You can use those to gather data from the state without worrying about the internal structure of the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `x-data-grid-pro` package exposes a set of state selectors that take the `apiRef.current.state` as an argument and return a value.
You can use them to get data from the state without worrying about its internal structure.
```

### Direct selector access

The simplest way to use a selector is to call it as a function with the state as its first argument.

```tsx
const pageSize = gridPageSizeSelector(apiRef.current.state);
```

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/DirectSelector.js", "bg": "inline", "hideToolbar": true}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/DirectSelector.js", "bg": "inline"}}
```

### With `useGridSelector`

If you want to access sole state value in the render of your components, you can use the `useGridSelector` hook.

```tsx
const pageSize = useGridSelector(apiRef, gridPageSizeSelector);
```

> > ⚠️ This hook can only be used inside the context of the grid. Otherwise, you will have an error saying that the state is not initialized during the first render.

Reviewer 2: > inside the context of the grid

The only component user can design inside the context of the grid are customized components? If yes, it could be nice to add "such as custom components". Otherwise, "inside the context" seems to be abstract

Author: It can also be in render functions like the `renderCell` on `GridColDef`
But the `such as` can be interesting, I'm adding it.

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/UseGridSelector.js", "bg": "inline", "hideToolbar": true}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/UseGridSelector.js", "bg": "inline"}}
```

### Catalog of selectors

Some selectors are yet to be documented.

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/SelectorsNoSnap.js", "bg": "inline", "hideToolbar": true}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/state/SelectorsNoSnap.js", "bg": "inline"}}
```

Author: For the `ApiNoSnap` we always have the `hideToolbar: true`, it is not a React example but a component we want to inline on the page
